Add docs for user namespaces in pods - phase 1 (KEP-127) (#35235)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/user-namespaces.md

---

> title: Use a user namespace with a stateless pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Use a User Namespace With a Pod
```

reviewers:
content_type: task
weight: 160

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.25
---
```

<!-- overview -->
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.25" state="alpha" >}}

This page shows how to configure a user namespace for stateless pods. This

> allows to isolate the user running inside the container from the one in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows the {{< glossary_tooltip text="kubelet" term_id="kubelet" >}} to isolate the
operating system user identity for processes running inside the container from the user
identity as seen by the
```

Author: I don't link this, "the operating system user identity" seems like a very complicated way of saying user ID, that we can just say user.

Author: Also, is the kubelet really needed in this overview? It seems like too much detail for this (also, is the kubelet, the high-level container runtime or the low level container runtime doing this?)

Author: Reverted this. The details about the kubelet being involved are explained at a later section in the concept page.

Author: Let me know what you think

> host. A process running as root in a container can run as a different (non-root)
> user in the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
host node. A process running as root in a container can actually run as a different,
non-root user as seen by the node's host OS.
```

Author: I've changed it to something that seems even better, from man 7 user_namespaces:

```
In particular, a process can have a
normal unprivileged user ID outside a user namespace while at the same time
having a user ID of 0 inside the namespace; in other words, the process has full
privileges for operations inside the user namespace, but is unprivileged for
operations outside the namespace.
```

You can use this feature to reduce the damage a compromised container can do to
the host or other pods in the same node. There are [several security

> vulnerabilities][KEP-vulns] rated HIGH and CRITICAL that were not explitable

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
vulnerabilities][KEP-vulns] rated either **HIGH** or **CRITICAL** that were not
exploitable
```
(the important change is to spell exploitable correctly)

when user namespaces is active. It is expected user namespace will mitigate some
future vulnerabilities too.

[KEP-vulns]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/217d790720c5aef09b8bd4d6ca96284a0affe6c2/keps/sig-node/127-user-namespaces#motivation

> ## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

Reviewer: There are some extra prerequisites:
- your cluster must include Linux nodes (Windows wouldn't work)
- you must either have permission to attach to Pods using `kubectl exec`, or shell access to the nodes. Consider mentioning this.

Author: Done, thanks

> {{< include "task-tutorial-prereqs.md" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< include "task-tutorial-prereqs.md" >}} {{< version-check >}}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{{% thirdparty-content single="true" %}}
<!-- if adding another runtime in the future, omit the single setting -->

```

> Furthermore, you also need support in your container runtime to use this feature

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Furthermore, you also need support in your 
{{< glossary_tooltip text="container runtime" term_id="container-runtime" >}}
to use this feature
```

with Kubernetes stateless pods:

* CRI-O: v1.25 has support for user namespaces.

* containerd: support is planned for the 1.7 release. See containerd
  issue [#7063][containerd-userns-issue] for more details.

> Support for this in [cri-dockerd is not planned][CRI-dockerd-issue] yet.

Reviewer: Please [avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future), and especially avoid making statements about the future of other projects. Maybe just mention that CRI-O has support.

Author: @sftim but these links are very relevant for users. I can change the wording, but I really really really want to link these issue from some part of the k8s documentation. What do you recommend?

Please note that if your container runtime doesn't support user namespaces, the
new `pod.spec` field will be silently ignored and the pod will be created without
user namespaces.

[CRI-dockerd-issue]: https://github.com/Mirantis/cri-dockerd/issues/74

> [containerd-userns-issue]: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/7063

Author: `is assigned to run via a container runtime`? This feels weird

<!-- steps -->

> ## Configure a Pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run a Pod that uses a user namespace {#create-pod}
```

A user namespace for a stateless pod is enabled setting the `hostUsers` field of
`.spec` to false. For example:

{{< codenew file="pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml" >}}

1. Create the pod on your cluster:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://k8s.io/examples/pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml
   ```

1. Attach to the container and run `cat /proc/self/uid_map`:

   ```shell
   kubectl attach -it userns bash
   ```

And run the command. The output is similar to this:

```none

> root@userns:/# cat /proc/self/uid_map

Reviewer: Ideally, [omit the prompt](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#don-t-include-the-command-prompt).

Author: Fixed

         0     131072      65536
```

This means that UID 0 is mapped to UID 131072 in the host and this is done for
65536 consecutive UIDs. In other words, UID 1 in the container is mapped to UID
131072+1 on the host, and so on.

For more details, please see `man 7 user_namespaces`.

## Verify if user namespaces is active for a pod

To verify that a pod is using user namespaces, if you exec into the pod you can
run:

```none
root@userns:/# cat /proc/self/uid_map
         0     131072      65536
root@userns:/# cat /proc/self/gid_map

>          0     131072      65536

Reviewer: Ideally, [omit the prompt](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#don-t-include-the-command-prompt).

Author: Fixed

```

User namespaces are active if the last value is 65536 in both cases. If you see

> that the last value is 4294967295, this means user namespaces are not active.

Author: @sftim why doesn't sound reliable to you? Can you please elaborate?

> that the last value is 4294967295, this means user namespaces are not active.

Reviewer: How do we know that the kubelet is running on a system where the maxuid is exactly 4294967295? Maybe one day we find a system using 48 bit or 64 bit UIDs.

If we add support for running kubelet in its own userns, do these docs then need to change?

> that the last value is 4294967295, this means user namespaces are not active.

Author: Hmm, yes, if the kubelet runs inside a userns the length will not be that. The mapped user might not be 0 either, though.

I can use a different check, that is more criptic...

> that the last value is 4294967295, this means user namespaces are not active.

Author: Changed to use this verification now

> that the last value is 4294967295, this means user namespaces are not active.

Author: Mentioned the case you called out here: if the kubelet is running inside a user namespace.

What do you think?

The value 4294967295 is the max number of UIDs/GIDs a Linux system can use. If
you see the whole range of UIDs/GIDs available to the pod, it means a user
namespaces is not being used.

If your pod's containers doesn't have a shell, you can do it from the host.

If you know which PID in the host the container process is using, you can read
from the host the same files: `cat /proc/$pid/uid_map` and `cat
/proc/$pid/gid_map`, replacing `$pid` with the container PID.

There are others ways that can be used to check if user namespaces are active or

> not. This section is not intended to list them all.

Reviewer: I'd omit this text; it's not that helpful for a task page.

Author: I removed that and what to do if the pod doesn't have a shell, as our example does have a shell. I think it will be nice to give those tips to users, but now that everything is separated in concept and example pages, not sure this fits. Let me know if you think it is better to add it back :)

## Limitations

When using a user namespace for the pod, it is disallowed to use other host

> namespaces. In particular, if `hostUsers: false` then it is not allowed to set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespaces. In particular, if you set `hostUsers: false` then you are not allowed to set
```

> either of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any of:
```

 * `hostNetwork: true`
 * `hostIPC: true`
 * `hostPID: true`

The pod is allowed to use no volumes at all or, if using volumes, only these
volume types are allowed:

 * configmap
 * secret
 * projected
 * downwardAPI
 * emptyDir

To guarantee that the pod can read the files of such volumes, volumes are
created as if `pod.spec.securityContext.FSGroup` is specified as `0`. If it is
specified to a different value, this other value will of course be honored
instead.

As a by-product of this, folders and files for these volumes will have

> permissions for the group, even if defaultMode or mode to specific items of the

Author: Then `mode` is missing too. Writing it here to not forget

volumes were specified without permissions to groups. For example, it is not
possible to mount these volumes in a way that its files have permissions only
for the owner. This is a limitation imposed by FSGroup. 

This is a limitation in Kubernetes v1.25 and future versions of Kubernetes might

> remove this limitation when user namespaces are in use.

Reviewer: Please [avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future).

Author: Removed

## Recommended node set-up

It is recommended that the host's files and host's process use UIDs/GIDs in the
range of 0-65535.

The kubelet will assign UIDs/GIDs higher than that to pods. Therefore, to
guarantee as much isolation as possible, the UIDs/GIDs used by the host's files
and host's processes should be in the range 0-65535.

Note that this recommendation is important to mitigate the impact of CVEs like
[CVE-2021-25741][CVE-2021-25741], where a pod can potentially read arbitrary
files in the hosts. If the UIDs/GIDs of the pod and the host don't overlap, it
is limited what a pod would be able to do: the pod UID/GID won't match the
host's file owner/group.

[CVE-2021-25741]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/104980

## Important considerations

The kubelet will decide automatically to which host UIDs/GIDs a pod will be
mapped to, and will do so in a way to guarantee that no two stateless pods on
the same node use the same mapping. 

The `RunAsUser`, `RunAsGroup`, `FSGroup`, etc. fields in the `pod.spec` always

> refer to the user inside the container.

Reviewer: Please write these fields with the capitalization that they have in the HTTP API.

Author: Fixed

example, if you check the user the container process is running `ps` from the
host. The user `ps` shows is not the same as the user you see if you execute
inside the container the command `id`.

This abstraction limits what can happen, for example, if the container manages
to escape to the host. Given that the container is running as a non-privileged
user on the host, it is limited what it can do to the host.

Furthermore, as users on each pod will be mapped to different non-overlapping
users in the host, it is limited what they can do to other pods too.

Capabilities granted to a pod are also limited to the pod user namespace and
mostly invalid out of it, some are even completely void. Here are two examples:
(a) `CAP_SYS_MODULE` does not have any effect if granted to a pod using user
namespaces, the pod isn't able to load kernel modules; (b) `CAP_SYS_ADMIN`
is limited to the pod's user namespace and invalid outside of it.

Without using a user namespace a container running as root, in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capability were
granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None of

> this is true when we use user namespaces.

Reviewer: This text would be a good paragraph to have in both the concept page and the task page.

Author: Added to both

If you want to know more details about what changes when user namespaces are in

> use, see `man 7 user_namespaces`.

Author: moved

* You need to exec commands in the host
* You need to be able to exec into pods
* Feature gate `UserNamespacesStatelessPodsSupport` need to be enabled.

In addition, support is needed in the
{{< glossary_tooltip text="container runtime" term_id="container-runtime" >}}
to use this feature with Kubernetes stateless pods:

* CRI-O: v1.25 has support for user namespaces.

Please note that **if your container runtime doesn't support user namespaces, the
new `pod.spec` field will be silently ignored and the pod will be created without
user namespaces.**

<!-- steps -->

## Run a Pod that uses a user namespace {#create-pod}

A user namespace for a stateless pod is enabled setting the `hostUsers` field of
`.spec` to `false`. For example:

{{< codenew file="pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml" >}}

1. Create the pod on your cluster:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://k8s.io/examples/pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml
   ```

1. Attach to the container and run `readlink /proc/self/ns/user`:

   ```shell
   kubectl attach -it userns bash
   ```

And run the command. The output is similar to this:

```none
readlink /proc/self/ns/user
user:[4026534732]
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it may be useful to show the output of /proc/pid/uid_map here to illustrate how ranges are mapped differently inside the container.

* The node OS needs to be Linux
* You need to exec commands in the host
* You need to be able to exec into pods
* Feature gate `UserNamespacesStatelessPodsSupport` need to be enabled.

In addition, support is needed in the
{{< glossary_tooltip text="container runtime" term_id="container-runtime" >}}
to use this feature with Kubernetes stateless pods:

* CRI-O: v1.25 has support for user namespaces.

Please note that **if your container runtime doesn't support user namespaces, the
new `pod.spec` field will be silently ignored and the pod will be created without
user namespaces.**

<!-- steps -->

## Run a Pod that uses a user namespace {#create-pod}

A user namespace for a stateless pod is enabled setting the `hostUsers` field of
`.spec` to `false`. For example:

{{< codenew file="pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml" >}}

1. Create the pod on your cluster:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://k8s.io/examples/pods/user-namespaces-stateless.yaml
   ```

1. Attach to the container and run `readlink /proc/self/ns/user`:

   ```shell
   kubectl attach -it userns bash
   ```

And run the command. The output is similar to this:

```none
readlink /proc/self/ns/user
user:[4026534732]

> cat /proc/self/uid_map

Reviewer 2: Thanks for adding this. Can we also show the output from the host user namespace for comparison?

Reviewer 3: added also the output from the host
